file-locking/README.rst, before:

================
Notes on locking
================

Linux: C Implementations
========================

File Locking has linux kernel support via standard C library using fcntl().
The mechanism uses 'struct flock' as the communication mechanism with (posix) fcntl().

The standard locking mechanism uses F_SETLK. This lock lives at the process level 
and is the original locking in linux. 
Around 2015 or so 'open file desription' locks came to be via F_OFD_SETLK (See [1]_ and [2]_). 
These are at the open file level. So while F_SETLK is not passed to child processes, OFD locks are.
And OFD locks remain attached to the open file handle. This can be enormously useful and
also surprising.

Posix locks are attached to (inode, pid) pair which means they work at the process level.
If thread opens same file, even tho has different file handle, when that thread closes
the fd, the lock is released for all threads in same process.

OFD locking was introduced to deal with this. Locking is attached to the "open file" 
and not the PID.

linux also provides "lockf" which is a wrapper around fcntl() locks - should only be used
in simple cases and will interact with "normal" fcntl() locks - caveat emptor.

Summary:

 *  Posix Lock: fcntl() - F_SETLK
 *  OFD Lock: fcntl() - F_OFD_SETLK
 *  lockf - bah

NB. The flock struct contains l_pid - this MUST be 0 for OFD locks and PID for posix locks.


Python
======

Python provides for same locking mechanisms - I recommend only 1 way for file locks in python.
Python library provides for:

 * fcntl.fcntl => do not use

As with C there is support for F_SETLK and F_OFD_SETLK.  While these work fine, they
require using 'struct' module to 'pack' and 'unpack' the C flock struct. To make this
work the caller must provide the sizes (coded with letters as per the python struct module)
of each element being packed. 

The python 3.12 docs have examples [3]_, and while they may well work for a Sun workstation
or similar, if you have one, the struct element sizes dont seem correct for X86_64.

I provide a little C-program to print out the correct byte sizes which you can then
map to the python struct letter codes [4]_

This approach is brittle - its one thing when you are coding with your own
C structures, its another entirely when using system ones - these sizes should 
be compiled into python - while these routines work I strongly recommend not using them
for this reason.

 * fcntl.lockf => do not use

Wrapper around fcntl() - in spite of name this is NOT C lockf() function.

 * fcntl.flock => *use this one*

Wrapper around flock with OFD support. i.e. this lock is associated with open file descriptor.
This is what I use and recommend>

========
Examples
========

C-code
======

Sample code for F_SETLK and F_OFD_SETLK

 * build 

   make

 * ./flock_sizes

Print size of struct flock elements
Used to make sure we use the correct sizes in python fcntl.fcntl approach.

 * ./c_lock_fcntl 
   
C-code locking with and without OFD

Tests: c_lock
=============

locking use 2 terminals. run c_lock_test in both.
First will acquire lock second will fail (until first exits)

 * Test 1 : Using F_SETLK

      ./c_lock_test

 * Test 2 : Using F_OFD_SETLK

   repeat test but with argument to turn on OFD

     ./c_lock_test ofd

 Test (1) and (2) both work.

Python : lock_fcntl
===================

F_SETLK and F_OFD_SETLK tests in python.

run test in 2 terminals as above:

 * Test 3 : Using F_SETLK

     ./lock_fcntl.py

 * Test 4 : Using F_OFD_SETLK

    ./lock_fcntl.py ofd
     
Test (3) and (4) both work.

Python : lock_flock
===================

This is what I am using.
As above, run test in 2 terminals.

 * Test 5 : 

     ./lock_fcntl.py

Test (5) works.

.. [1] File private locks https://lwn.net/Articles/586904/
.. [2] Open File Description https://lwn.net/Articles/640404/
.. [3] Python fcntl docs: https://docs.python.org/3/library/fcntl.html
.. [4] Python struct module: https://docs.python.org/3/library/struct.html

Commit message:

tweak readme for file locking

file-locking/README.rst, after:

================
Notes on locking
================

Linux: C Implementations
========================

File Locking has linux kernel support via standard C library using fcntl().
The mechanism uses 'struct flock' as the communication mechanism with (posix) fcntl().

The standard locking mechanism uses F_SETLK. This lock lives at the process level 
and is the original locking in linux. 
Around 2015 or so 'open file desription' locks came to be via F_OFD_SETLK (See [1]_ and [2]_). 
These are at the open file level. So while F_SETLK is not passed to child processes, OFD locks are.
And OFD locks remain attached to the open file handle. This can be enormously useful and
also surprising.

Posix locks are attached to (inode, pid) pair which means they work at the process level.
If thread opens same file, even tho has different file handle, when that thread closes
the fd, the lock is released for all threads in same process.

OFD locking was introduced to deal with this. Locking is attached to the "open file" 
and not the PID.

linux also provides "lockf" which is a wrapper around fcntl() locks - should only be used
in simple cases and will interact with "normal" fcntl() locks - caveat emptor.

Summary:

 *  Posix Lock: fcntl() - F_SETLK
 *  OFD Lock: fcntl() - F_OFD_SETLK
 *  lockf - bah

NB. The flock struct contains l_pid - this MUST be 0 for OFD locks and PID for posix locks.

Its also worth noting that locking can be file system dependent. In particular NFS should
probably be avoided. Since my dominant use case is single machine, multiple process, I use 
/tmp which is a TMPFS file system and works well.

Python
======

Python provides for same locking mechanisms - I recommend only 1 way for file locks in python.
Python library provides for:

 * fcntl.fcntl => do not use

As with C there is support for F_SETLK and F_OFD_SETLK.  While these work fine, they
require using 'struct' module to 'pack' and 'unpack' the C flock struct. To make this
work the caller must provide the sizes (coded with letters as per the python struct module)
of each element being packed. 

The python 3.12 docs have examples [3]_, and while they may well work for a Sun workstation
or similar, if you have one, the struct element sizes dont seem correct for X86_64.

I provide a little C-program to print out the correct byte sizes which you can then
map to the python struct letter codes [4]_

This approach is brittle - its one thing when you are coding with your own
C structures, its another entirely when using system ones - these sizes should 
be compiled into python - while these routines work I strongly recommend not using them
for this reason.

 * fcntl.lockf => do not use

Wrapper around fcntl() - in spite of name this is NOT C lockf() function.

 * fcntl.flock => *use this one*

Wrapper around flock with OFD support. i.e. this lock is associated with open file descriptor.
This is what I use and recommend>

========
Examples
========

C-code
======

Sample code for F_SETLK and F_OFD_SETLK

 * build 

   make

 * ./flock_sizes

Print size of struct flock elements
Used to make sure we use the correct sizes in python fcntl.fcntl approach.

 * ./c_lock_fcntl 
   
C-code locking with and without OFD

Tests: c_lock
=============

locking use 2 terminals. run c_lock_test in both.
First will acquire lock second will fail (until first exits)

 * Test 1 : Using F_SETLK

      ./c_lock_test

 * Test 2 : Using F_OFD_SETLK

   repeat test but with argument to turn on OFD

     ./c_lock_test ofd

 Test (1) and (2) both work.

Python : lock_fcntl
===================

F_SETLK and F_OFD_SETLK tests in python.

run test in 2 terminals as above:

 * Test 3 : Using F_SETLK

     ./lock_fcntl.py

 * Test 4 : Using F_OFD_SETLK

    ./lock_fcntl.py ofd
     
Test (3) and (4) both work.

Python : lock_flock
===================

This is what I am using.
As above, run test in 2 terminals.

 * Test 5 : 

     ./lock_fcntl.py

Test (5) works.

.. [1] File private locks https://lwn.net/Articles/586904/
.. [2] Open File Description https://lwn.net/Articles/640404/
.. [3] Python fcntl docs: https://docs.python.org/3/library/fcntl.html
.. [4] Python struct module: https://docs.python.org/3/library/struct.html
